Sample Newspaper/Online Article
Campus newspapers are a great way to make your fellow students aware of important 
issues. Contact the editor of your campus paper and encourage him/her to publish 
an article about the dangers of prescription drug abuse, especially around high stress 
times like midterms, final exams and even other campus events like “homecoming.” 
You can tailor the following article to your college or university by adding your own 
quotes or interviewing a well-known or respected campus leader.
As ExAm WEEk NEArs, somE studENts mA y turN  
to risky “ study Aid” 
Exams are just around the corner, and for many college students that means little sleep and a lot of added stress and anxiety. While it’s not uncommon for the typical 
college student to survive all night study sessions with the help of a little extra sugar 
and caffeine, a few will turn to something far more risky: prescription drugs.
Prescription drug abuse is a serious and growing 
problem on college campuses across the U.S. 
These days, the non-medical use of prescription 
medications—most notably stimulants (Adderall, 
Concerta, Ritalin), pain relievers (Vicodin, 
OxyContin, Percocet, methadone), and sedatives/
tranquilizers (Valium, Xanax, Ativan, Ambien)—is 
second only to marijuana use among college 
students. Although most college students use 
prescription drugs as prescribed, about one in four 
people aged 18 to 20 report using these 
“It’s a real problem—one that campus administrators, students and parents need 
to be more acutely aware of,” said [RepResentative fRom (national 
oRganization/leadeR] about scope of problem. “By students’ sophomore year in 
college, about half of their classmates will have been offered the opportunity to abuse 
a prescription drug. When misused or abused, these medications have the potential 
for addiction and many students may not even realize they are putting themselves in 
harm’s way.”  ““By students’ sophomore year 
in college, about half of their classmates will have been offered the opportunity to abuse 
a prescription drug. 
medications nonmedically at least once in their lives (NSDUH, 2008), and many more 
have been offered these medications by friends or fellow students. Sample Newspaper/Online Article • 2
That’s because college students who misuse prescription drugs aren’t always looking 
to get high. More often, they take these medications to help manage their daily lives—
to reduce the stress and anxiety of college life, boost their mood, stay up all night 
writing a term paper or increase their stamina on the field during the big game. College 
students are twice as likely as others their age to use stimulants nonmedically, mostly 
as “study aids”— to increase energy levels, improve concentration and help them stay 
up all night cramming for exams. 
These students might believe popping a pill might give them an edge when it comes 
to improving academic performance, but many underestimate the serious risks of 
misusing or abusing prescription drugs. 
“Campus life can be stressful and most students mistakenly believe that prescription 
drugs are safe just because they are legal. But when prescription medicines are 
misused or taken without a doctor’s prescription, or taken in combination with 
alcohol, they can be just as harmful as illegal street drugs like cocaine and heroin” 
says [INSERT NAME OF CAMPUS HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONAL OR STUDENT 
LEADER, TITLE, SCHOOL NAME]. “Abusing prescription drugs doesn’t help students 
get better grades, but it can jeopardize their health and safety, and they may suffer the 
consequences for years to come.”
When taken as directed and by the person for whom they are prescribed, these 
medications can help people with a host of medical conditions feel better. But the 
inappropriate use of prescription medications can cause serious health problems 
ranging from increases in blood pressure and heart rate to overdose, organ damage, 
seizures, and sometimes even death. Prescription drug abuse may be especially 
problematic for students with underlying or undiagnosed health conditions like heart 
disease. 
“Healthcare professional prescribe medications based on an individual’s health and 
medical history, and what is appropriate for one person may not be safe for another,” 
[saYs XXXXXX]. “When used the wrong way, prescription drugs can become habit 
forming and set the stage for abusing other harmful substances.”
In fact, research shows that students who take prescription drugs for non-medical 
reasons are at least five times more likely to develop a drug abuse problem than those 
who don’t. 
“A big part of the problem is that these medications are easy to obtain. They can 
often be found on bedside tables or in dresser drawers and medicine cabinets in 
dorm rooms and family homes,” says Ray Bullman, Executive Vice President of the 
National Council on Patient Information and Education (NCPIE). “Young adults get 
prescription drugs from friends, roommates or relatives by stealing, buying or simply 
asking for them. in some cases, students abuse their own prescription medications by 
taking higher or more frequent doses than directed by their healthcare professional or 
providing them to their friends.”
Students who are misusing prescription drugs may exhibit physical changes like dilated 
pupils, shaking, loss of coordination, or slurred speech. They may also have sudden 
and unusual mood swings or behavior changes including irritability or loss of interest in 
friends and activities.Sample Newspaper/Online Article • 3
[NAME OF CAMPUS HEALTH REP/STUDENT  
LEADER] recommends that students combat 
stress by getting an early start, studying with 
friends, hiring a tutor if needed, and focusing 
on proper nutrition and rest in the weeks 
leading up to exams. If students are having 
trouble handling the pressure of exams, they 
are encouraged to talk to with their professors, 
resident advisor or a member of campus health 
services. Students are also urged to keep their 
own prescription medications in a safe place 
and not be pressured into sharing medicines 
with roommates and friends.
[NAME OF COLLEgE] is working to raise 
awareness about the dangers of prescription 
drug misuse and abuse with the help of a new 
resource kit developed by the National Council 
on Patient Information and Education (NCPIE). 
“Taking Action to Prevent and Address 
Prescription Drug Abuse” is available at  
www.talkaboutrx.org and includes a 
number of materials and ideas for addressing 
prescription drug abuse on campus.
[NAME OF COLLEgE] has planned the following activities to help students deal with 
stress during [MIDTERMS/FINALS WEEk OR OTHER CAMPUS EVENTS LIkE 
“HOMECOMINg”].
Editor’s NotE: sEvEN Quick & EAsy W Ays to mANAgE strEss
1. Eat healthy foods including fresh fruits, vegetables and lean protein. This will improve your energy and ability to think clearly. 
2. Stay active. Exercise is one of the best ways to beat stress. Even a few minutes every day can help.
3. Study with friends. Being in a group will help you feel less isolated, and you may 
even have a little fun.
4. Build in time for breaks. Take a few minutes to take a walk, practice deep 
breathing or other relaxing activities that help you clear your head and feel 
reenergized.
5. Get plenty of rest. You might not be able to get as much sleep as you’re used to, 
but aim for at least 6-7 hours each night. People who are well rested do better on 
exams.
6. Avoid using any drugs or alcohol. They can cloud your mental abilities and actually harm your performance.
7. Get support. Turn to family and friends for support during this exciting, yet 
challenging time in your life. Remember just do the best you can do.
What’s the difference? 
Prescription drug misuse  
vs. Abuse
It all comes down to intention. Taking 
prescription drugs to feel good or get high 
is an example of drug abuse. Misusing a 
medication might include taking your own 
prescribed medication differently or at a higher 
dose than was advised by your healthcare professional or self-medicating with someone 
else’s (for example, taking a friend’s Percocet 
to treat a headache, sharing a sleeping aid 
with a friend who needs a night of good 
sleep). Whatever the reason, using these medications nonmedically—even just once—is 
very dangerous, and might even be illegal.
www.talkaboutrx.org